This PR just exists to comment on the Pre-RFC (#1)
Urhengulas/unsize-experiments: README.md

# Unsize and CoerceUnsize v2

This repo experiments with a new design for the `Unsize` and `CoerceUnsized` traits, making them more flexible and applicable to more types.
The motivation is to see how flexible the traits could be made and whether this flexibility pays off or not.

> An idea that kicked this off was to have `Vec<T>: Unsize<[T]>`, which requires user code to run to be able to adjust the pointer for the data.

Author: I do not understand this sentence, in particular the second half. Should the "to run" be removed?

Reviewer: Ah, I forgot to update the part of the readme above the RFC

> Today `Vec<T>` implements `Deref<Target = [T]>` for convenience as this allows dispatching slice methods on objects of `Vec<T>`, ye `Deref` was meant for smart pointers instead. What this impl really feels like is more akin to unsizing. Obviously the `Deref` impl cannot be revoked from `Vec<T>` anymore, but assuming an unsizing impl would've been the proper call this would then also imply that unsizing would have to be introduced into autoderef (instead of just special casing array unsizing).

Author: Why would unsizing have to be introduced in autoderef?

Reviewer: same here

What follows here is the accompanied pre-RFC:

# RFC

## Unsize- Feature Name: `unsizev2`
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: [rust-lang/rfcs#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/pull/0000)
- Rust Issue: [rust-lang/rust#0000](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/0000)

# Summary
[summary]: #summary

> Move the unsizing logic out of the compiler into library source, allowing for a more flexible design of the features.

Author: ```suggestion
Move the unsizing logic out of the compiler into library source, allowing for a more flexible design of the features and allowing user code to implement unsizing for their own types.
```

# Motivation
[motivation]: #motivation

> Currently unsizing in Rust is very rigid, only allowed in very specific scenarios permitted by the rules surrounding the current `Unsize` and `CoerceUnsized` traits and it's automatic implementations by the compiler.

Author: ```suggestion
Currently unsizing in Rust is very rigid, only allowed in very specific scenarios permitted by the rules surrounding the current `Unsize` and `CoerceUnsized` traits and its automatic implementations by the compiler.
```

> This on one hand, has the downside of being very magical, as the majority of the logic happens inside the compiler opposed to the source code and it also prevents certain unsizing implementations from being doable today

Author: I found this a bit hard to read.
```suggestion
This has the downside of being very magical, as the majority of the logic happens inside the compiler opposed to the source code. It also prevents certain unsizing implementations from being doable today.
```

This RFC attempts to make these rules more flexible by also allowing user implementations of the traits that define how the metadata is derived and composed back into unsized objects.

# Guide-level explanation
[guide-level-explanation]: #guide-level-explanation

> 

Author: Maybe a brief overview of the relationship between unsize and coerceunsize would be helpful in the beginning?

Author: I guess this was already clear to you Lukas, but I just realized that `Unsize` converts from `T::Metadata` to `U::Metadata` and `CoerceUnsize` converts from `T` to `U`.

```
 ___________                 ___________
|           | CoerceUnsize  |           |
|     T     |-------------->|     U     |
|           |               |           |
| Metadata-------------------->Metadata |
|___________|    Unsize     |___________|
```

Author: lol, I just read that this is what you are saying in the reference level explaination

Reviewer: Ye, I am having trouble separating the guide vs reference explanations. In part because this RFC kind of talks like introducing these things while also comparing to the status quo. Its a bit odd.

## Unsize

Unsizing relationships between two types can be defined by implementing the unsafe `Unsize` trait for a type and its target unsized type.
These implementations describe how the metadata is derived from a source type and its metadata for its target unsized type.

An example implementation of `Unsize` for `[T; N]` to `[T]` unsizing looks like the following:

```rs
// SAFETY:
// - `Unsize::target_metadata` returns length metadata that spans the entire array exactly.
// - `[T; N]` is a contiguous slice of `T`'s, so a pointer pointing to its data is valid to be interpreted as a pointer to a slice `[T]`.
unsafe impl<T, const N: usize> Unsize<[T]> for [T; N] {
    fn target_metadata((): <Self as Pointee>::Metadata) -> <[T] as Pointee>::Metadata {
        N
    }
}
```

The metadata for the source type `[T; N]` is the unit type `()`, as there is no metadata for sized types.

> The implementation then just returns the length `N` from the array type, as this is the appropriate metadata for a slice produced from such an array.

Author: Should we explain why this is the appropriate metadata?

Reviewer: I think thats implied by the safety comment in the example already.

> <!-- not the best example thats following here, but I could not think of an unsized to unsized relationship thats not trait upcasting, given custom unsized typed are not currently a thing -->

Author: Maybe you can use the `Vec` example you mentioned in the motivation section?

Reviewer: The example no longer fits as I could down the scope, so the vec exmaple cant be modeled with this. (but as i said, the introduction was outdated)

Another example that does an unsized to unsized coercion is the following implementation (for trait upcasting provided by the compiler):

```rs
trait Super {}

> trait Sub: Super {}

Author: ```suggestion
trait Sub: Super {}

```

// SAFETY:
// - `Unsize::target_metadata` returns a vtable provided by the vtable of the `dyn Sub` object.
// - `dyn Super` is a super trait of `dyn Sub`, so a pointer pointing to data for a `dyn Sub` is valid to be used as a data pointer to a `dyn Super`
unsafe impl Unsize<dyn Super> for dyn Sub {
    unsafe fn target_metadata(metadata: <Self as Pointee>::Metadata) -> <dyn super as Pointee>::Metadata {
        metadata.upcast()
    }
}
```

This is an unsizing impl required for trait upcasting, where the metadata (the vtable of the trait) of the `dyn Super` type has to be extracted from the the metadata of the `dyn Sub` trait.

## CoerceUnsized

> To actually enable the unsizing coercion of objects, the `CoerceUnsized` trait that defines how the unsizing of the inner type occurs for a given pointer or wrapper type has to be implemented.

Author: I found this sentence a bit hard to read.
```suggestion
To actually enable the unsizing coercion of objects, the `CoerceUnsized` trait has to be implemented.
It defines how the unsizing of the inner type occurs for a given pointer or wrapper type.
```

An unsizing coercion is then done by the compiler implicitly when required by inserting a call to the `CoerceUnsized::coerce_unsized` function.

> A `CoerceUnsized` implementation has specific requirements to be valid which boil down to 2 kinds:

Author: ```suggestion
A `CoerceUnsized` implementation has specific requirements to be valid which boil down to 2 kinds:
- A non-delegating `CoerceUnsized` impl
- A delegating `CoerceUnsized` impl
```

### A non-delegating `CoerceUnsized` impl

Such an impl is used for actual pointer like types, such as `&'a T` or `Arc<T>`.

> These kinds of impls are required to list a trait bound with the `Unsize` trait on the generic parameters of the pointer types.

Author: What does this mean?

Reviewer: This is difficult to describe informally (the reference has it laid out better). Does 
> The implementing type and the `CoerceUnsized` target type must differ in a single generic parameter only.
> The differing generic parameters are required to then be part of a `T: Unsize<U>` bound where `T` is the relevant generic parameter of the implementing type and `U` the relevant generic parameter of the `CoerceUnsized` target type.

read better?

Author: I feel like the new text talks about something different. But I think I understand the new one.

        unsafe { &*core::ptr::from_raw_parts(untyped_data_ptr, metadata) }
    }
}
```

An example impl for the `Arc<T>` type would be the following:
```rs
impl<T, U> CoerceUnsized<Arc<U>> for Arc<T>
where
    T: ?Sized + Unsize<U>,
    U: ?Sized
{
    fn coerce_unsized(self) -> Arc<U> {
        let ptr = Arc::into_raw(self);
        let metadata = Unsize::target_metadata(core::ptr::metadata(ptr));
        let untyped_data_ptr = (ptr as *const T).cast::<()>();
        // SAFETY: [`Unsize`] demands that the return value of `Unsize::target_metadata` is valid to be used together with the data pointer to be re-interpreted as the unsized type and that `std::mem::size_of` on `U` will report the same size as the `T`.
        unsafe { Arc::from_raw(core::ptr::from_raw_parts(untyped_data_ptr, metadata)) }
    }
}
```

Important to note is that `Unsize` impls are required to return metadata that make the unsized object report the same size as the source type.
If that was not the case, the `Arc` impl above would be unsound, as its destructor would try to deallocate a smaller allocation than it initially owned.

### A delegating `CoerceUnsized` impl

> Such an impl is used for wrapper like types, such as `Cell<T>` or `Pin<T>` where the impl is required to list a `CoerceUnsized` bound on the generic parameters of the wrapping type.

Author: ```suggestion
Such an impl is used for wrapper like types, such as `Cell<T>` or `Pin<T>` where the impl is required to list a `CoerceUnsized` bound on the generic parameters of the wrapping type.

```

where
    T: CoerceUnsized<U>,
{
    fn coerce_unsized(self) -> Option<U> {
        match self {
            Option::Some(t) => Option::Some(t.coerce_unsized()),
            Option::None => Option::None,
        }
    }
}
```
With such an impl, `Option<&[T; N]>` could coerce to `Option<&[T]>`.

# Reference-level explanation
[reference-level-explanation]: #reference-level-explanation

## `Unsize`

The new `Unsize` trait definition looks like the following:

```rs
/// # Safety
///
/// The implementation of [`Unsize::target_metadata`] must return metadata that
/// - is valid for interpreting the `Self` type to `Target`, and
/// - where using `core::mem::size_of` on the unsized object will report the same size as on the source object.
pub unsafe trait Unsize<Target>
where
    Target: ?Sized,
{
    fn target_metadata(metadata: <Self as Pointee>::Metadata) -> <Target as Pointee>::Metadata;
}
```

This trait allows specifying how to derive the metadata required for unsizing from the metadata of the source type `Self` or the compile time type information.

## `CoerceUnsized`

The new `CoerceUnsized` trait definition looks like the following:

> ```rust

Author: You've always used `rs` before.
````suggestion
```rs
````

pub trait CoerceUnsized<Target> {
    fn coerce_unsized(self) -> Target;
}
```

Implementations of this trait now specify how the coercion is done.

> This also drops the `?Sized` bound on `Target`, as returning unsized values is not possible currently and it being possible to relax the bound later on.

Author: ```suggestion
This also drops the `?Sized` bound on `Target`, as returning unsized values is not possible currently. This can be relaxed without breakage in the future.
```

In order to prevent misuse of the trait as means of implicit conversions, implementations for this trait require specific conditions to hold which the compiler will enforce. This can be relaxed without breakage in the future.
For an implementation to be valid, one of the following must hold:
1. `Self` and `Target`
    - must be references or raw pointers to different generic parameters
    - type parameter `T` of `Self` has `T: Unsize<U>` bound where `U` is the type parameter of `Target`
2. `Self` and `Target`
    - must have the same type constructor, varying in a single type parameter
    - type parameter `T` of `Self` must have a `T: CoerceUnsized<U>` bound where `U` is the type parameter of `Target`
    - Example:

>         ```rust

Author: ```suggestion
        ```rs
```

        impl<T: CoerceUnsized<U>, U> CoerceUnsized<Cell<U>>
            for Cell<T>
        ```
3. `Self` and `Target`
    - must have the same type constructor, varying in a single type parameter
    - type parameter `T` of `Self` must have a `T: Unsize<U>` bound where `U` is the differing type parameter of `Target`
    - Example:

>         ```rust

Author: ```suggestion
        ```rs
```

        impl<T: ?Sized + Unsize<U>, U: ?Sized, A: Allocator> CoerceUnsized<Box<U, A>>
            for Box<T, A>
        ```

> 

Author: I feel like case two and three should be merged since they are largely similar

Reviewer: That was the case before, aman proposed to split them as that makes it more distinguishable.

Author: 👍🏾

## Implementations provided by the standard library

> Today, all `Unsize` implementations are provided by the compiler.

Author: Which other unsize implementation exist in the compiler? should we list why they can't be moved to the standard library?

Reviewer: Isn't that explained? All others stay in the compiler, which are then listed in the following section `Implementations provided by the compiler`. The reason for as to why is also outlined, because they are the `dyn Trait` implementations which requires knowledge of defined traits.

> Most of them will continue to be provided by the compiler as they involve trait objects which depend on all traits defined in a compilation.

Author: ```suggestion
Most of them will continue to be provided by the compiler as they involve trait objects which depend on all traits being defined during compilation.
```

The implementation will be as follows (and live in `core`):

```rs
// SAFETY:
// - `Unsize::target_metadata` returns length metadata that spans the entire array exactly.
// - `[T; N]` is a contiguous slice of `T`'s, so a pointer pointing to its data is valid to be interpreted as a pointer to a slice `[T]`.
unsafe impl<T, const N: usize> Unsize<[T]> for [T; N] {
    fn target_metadata((): <Self as Pointee>::Metadata) -> <[T] as Pointee>::Metadata {
        N
    }
}
```

The non-delegating implementations of `CoerceUnsized` provided by the standard library will have the implementation of their `fn coerce_unsized` function written to disassemble the source into pointer and source metadata, make use of the `Unsize` trait for extracting the target metadata from the source metadata, and then reassembling the pointer and target metadata into the target.

For the delegating implementations, the implementation of the `fn coerce_unsized` function will merely delegate to the inner value and then wrap that result again.

## Implementations provided by the compiler

> > Note: This section uses fictional rust syntax

Author: ```suggestion
> ⚠️ Warning: This section uses fictional rust syntax
```

> The compiler will generate `Unsize` implementations for types to trait object for their implemented types as before :

Author: ```suggestion
The compiler will generate `Unsize` implementations for types to trait object for their implemented types as before:
```

This would be similar to how builtin operators for primitives work currently, where they are typechecked with the trait impls but then lowered back to builtin operators in the mir.

## TypeMetadata<T> and Unsizing

See the following PR for context: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/97052.

With this new definition, we can implement `CoerceUnsized` for `TypeMetadata` without having to special case it in the compiler as follows:

```rs
struct TypedMetadata<T: ?Sized>(pub <T as core::ptr::Pointee>::Metadata);

impl<T, U> CoerceUnsized<TypedMetadata<U>> for TypedMetadata<T>
where
    T: ?Sized + Unsize<U>,
    U: ?Sized,
{
    fn coerce_unsized(self) -> TypedMetadata<U> {
        TypedMetadata(Unsize::target_metadata(self.0))
    }
}
```

## Pin Unsoundness

See the following issue for context: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/68015

The design of the new traits here do not address the underlying issue in regards to `Pin`.

> The author of this RFC feels like addressing the `Pin` soundness in the definitions of the traits is wrong, as in almost all cases where are a user implements one of these traits `Pin` will be irrelevant to them. And at its core, unsizing is not coupled with `Pin` whatsoever.
> It would make much more sense to fix the unsound `CoerceUnsized` implementation that `Pin` provides.
> That is given the current implementation of (with the new definition of the trait):

Author: ```suggestion
The author of this RFC feels like addressing the `Pin` soundness in the definitions of the traits is wrong, as in almost all cases where a user implements one of these traits `Pin` will be irrelevant to them. And at its core, unsizing is not coupled with `Pin` whatsoever.

It would make much more sense to fix the unsound `CoerceUnsized` implementation that `Pin` provides.

This is the current implementation (using the new trait from this RFC):
```

```rs

// Copied from core library docs:
// Note: this means that any impl of `CoerceUnsized` that allows coercing from
// a type that impls `Deref<Target=impl !Unpin>` to a type that impls
// `Deref<Target=Unpin>` is unsound. Any such impl would probably be unsound
// for other reasons, though, so we just need to take care not to allow such
// impls to land in std.
impl<P, U> CoerceUnsized<Pin<U>> for Pin<P>
where
    P: CoerceUnsized<U>,
    // U: core::ops::Deref, this bound is accidentally missing upstream, hence we can't use `Pin::new_unchecked` in the implementation
{
    fn coerce_unsized(self) -> Pin<U> {
        Pin {
            pointer: self.pointer.coerce_unsized(),
        }
    }
}
```

> We should rather strife to have the following 2 implementations:

Author: ```suggestion
Instead, we should rather strive to have the following 2 implementations:
```

```rs
// Permit going from Pin<impl Unpin> to Pin<impl Unpin>
impl<P, U> CoerceUnsized<Pin<U>> for Pin<P>
where
    P: CoerceUnsized<U>,
    P: Deref<Target: Unpin>,
    U: Deref<Target: Unpin>,
{
    fn coerce_unsized(self) -> Pin<U> {
        Pin::new(self.pointer.coerce_unsized())
    }
}
// Permit going from Pin<impl Pin> to Pin<impl Pin>
impl<P, U> CoerceUnsized<Pin<U>> for Pin<P>
where
    P: CoerceUnsized<U>,
    P: core::ops::Deref<Target: !Unpin>,
    U: core::ops::Deref<Target: !Unpin>,
{
    fn coerce_unsized(self) -> Pin<U> {
        // SAFETY: The new unpin Pin is derived from another unpin Pin, so we the pinned contract is kept up
        unsafe { Pin::new_unchecked(self.pointer.coerce_unsized()) }
    }
}
```

While this is a breaking change, it should be in line with being a soundness fix.
Unfortunately, these kind of impl requires negative bounds and negative reasoning which is its own can of worms and therefor likely not to happen, see https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/42721.

> Though maybe allowing them for auto traits alone could work out fine, given those types of traits are already rather special.

Author: Does this mean this RFC would be blocked on negative bounds? If yes, can the pin part be broken out of this RFC and be done at a later point? If yes, we should clarify that.

Reviewer: Well it depends. Assuming the negative bounds would be "accepted" as the fix, then its not blocked on them. Because this RFC does not change the status quo in regards to the unsoundness (it doesn't make it worse). I'll add that as a note.

## Custom Reborrows

See the following issue for context: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/issues/1403

In the linked issue the idea was to generalize `CoerceUnsized` as a general `Coerce` trait.

The design proposed here would still enable this, although it raises some questions.

> - For one, reborrows should be guaranteed to be no-ops, as all that should change in "reborrow coercions" are the corresponding lifetimes, yet this RFC exposes a function that will be run on coercion.

Author: Does "this RFC" refer to this RFC or to RFC 1403?

Reviewer: This one here. Note that reborros has no rfc, just an "idea issue"

- Generalizing this to a general `Coerce` trait would require specialization and/or negative trait bound reasoning, such that `&'a mut T: CoerceUnsized<&'b T>` (for reborrows) but also `&'a mut T: CoerceUnsized<&'b U>, T: Unsize<U>` for unsizing coercions can both be done as impls.

The first issue is only of concern with the proposed design here, while the second one is a more general issue relevant to impl overlap.

# Drawbacks
[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

> - This proposal allows for some non-sensical `CoerceUnsized` implementations resulting in odd unsizing coercions, though the restrictions on the `CoerceUnsized` trait try to limit them (for the time being).

Author: What are examples of odd unsizing coercions?

> - Unsizing coercions are now able to run arbitrary user code, placing it into a similar category to `Deref` in that regard, effectively adding yet more user facing \*magic\* to the language.

Author: How is that magic? Isn't it becoming pretty transparent what happens, while before it was compiler magic?

Reviewer: magic as in code being magically run with no syntax indicating that (as unsizing coercions are implicit, just like deref coercions)

> - The `Unsize` trait now depends on the `Pointee` trait which means any push for stabilization will depend on the stabilization of said trait.

Author: I first read "of sad trait" and was like "oh no, poor trait, why are you sad" xD

# Prior art
[prior-art]: #prior-art

There is another Pre-RFC that tries to improve Unsizing which can be found [here](https://internals.rust-lang.org/t/pre-rfc-improved-unsizing/16861).
It does so by just allowing more impls of the current traits, while restricting them by taking visibilities of fields into account which complicates the traits in a (subjectively to the author) confusing way.
And while the RFC makes the traits more flexible, it does not offer the same flexibility that this proposal offers.

# Unresolved questions
[unresolved-questions]: #unresolved-questions

> - Given the pin unsoundness proposal, assuming negative reason was a thing, would an impl permitting to go from `Pin<impl Unpin>` to `Pin<impl !Unpin>` be safe?

Author: Safe or sound? Or are they the same in this context?

Reviewer: should be `sound` good catch. (fwiw the difference is subtle and not too relevant here)

> - The compiler emitted implementations for the unsize trait, in particular the `Foo<..., T, ...>` case may collide with user implementations. Is this problematic? Should they be overridable?

Author: I don't get why the compiler emits those implements? when are they useful?

Reviewer: These impls are visibile on stable today already (which is described earlier in the RFC) and because of that we need to keep supporting them as removing this would be a breaking change

Author: Yes, I got that they are emitted at the moment and that they cannot be removed. I was just wondering why they are emitted aka. what is their purpose?

Reviewer: They were emitted for people to benefit from unsizing coercion for their own times without stabilizing the traits

- Will this design prevent any scenarios from being ever supported?
- As usual, naming. Given we might want to introduce multiple unsize traits for certain requirements, should the proposed trait stick to `Unsize` or something more specific like `FromMetadataUnsize`?

# Future possibilities
[future-possibilities]: #future-possibilities

> - Expand the compiler emitted implementations of `CoerceUnsized` to enums, such as `Option<T>: CoerceUnsized<Option<U>>` where `T: CoerceUnsized<U>`.

Author: Why won't this be possible with this RFC? Didn't you even have an example with `Option`? And why should they be compiler emitted and not in the standard library?

Reviewer: The section doesnt say that its not possible with this RFC, its just something one could consider doing in the future but the RFC is not about that part. Whether  they are emitted by compiler or added manually doesn't matter either. its a future possibility in that these are things one could think aobut after the RFC got accepted
